hello everyone my name is Alex and I'm
one of the expert IELTS teachers here at
e2 language comm if you clicked on this
video it's probably because you want to
or you need to work on your grammar and
that's what we're going to do in this
writing clinic we're gonna work on
complex sentences and I promise it's
actually not that complex
so let's get started today's lesson I'm
going to show you the difference between
a simple compound and a complex sentence
and then we're just going to do a stack
of practice so even though it may be a
little daunting at the moment sounds
scary complex sentences subordinating
conjunctions we're gonna do so much
practice by the end you will be an
absolute grammar weapon so why do we
need to look at complex sentences and
subordinating conjunctions well if
you're preparing for the IELTS test this
is a really important part of your score
not just in writing but in speaking as
well but I'm going to focus on the
writing part here here's the criteria
you've seen this a million times on the
right is the grammar grammatical range
and accuracy criterion band seven
requires that you use a variety of
complex structures so you must use a
variety of complex structures to score
bound seven and up and big problem for
people is down here at band four where
it says uses only a very limited range
of structures and only rare use of
subordinate clauses so this begs the
question doesn't it what is a complex
structure well a complex structure
contains a subordinate clause so what is
a subordinate clause well let's steel
first with this question what is a
clause basically a clause is a chunk of
language and this chunk of language has
a subject and a verb at least a subject
and a verb like this she runs he drives
a car they live in a large house all of
these chunks of
which have a subject and a verb and
sometimes a little bit of extra stuff as
well and these are all full sentences
complete thoughts these are called
independent clauses they don't need
anything else to make sense there are
the clauses like this because she runs
when he drives a car although they live
in a large house so again we've got a
subject in a verb but here we've got an
extra word because when although and now
the sentences well they're not really
sentences they don't make sense
these are subordinate clauses there's a
subject and a verb and another word a
subordinating conjunction let's see one
more time who runs which he drives where
they live these are still clauses
because there's a subject and a verb but
they start with a relative pronoun who
which where so these are relative
clauses so a complex sentence contains a
language chunk that starts with a
subordinating conjunction or a relative
pronoun now we're going to come back to
this so don't worry just yet let's start
with simple sentences and go from there
we already saw some simple sentences
before but here are a couple more many
children play computer games subject
verb this is a full complete thought
others prefer sports this is another
complete thought this is two simple
sentences here how can I join these
sentences together to make compound
sentences this is pretty easy we've got
the same two sentences many children
playing computer games
others prefer sports and we just put in
the middle a word like this but now
we've got a compound sentence so
compound sentence has two full sentences
two complete thoughts and a coordinating
conjunction in between them so
coordinating conjunction sounds like a
big word but no need to panic how am I
going to remember all the coordinating
conjunction
it sounds like a lot but it's really
really simple especially in terms of
compound sentences there are only seven
words there are only seven coordinating
conjunctions to create compound
sentences and you can remember all seven
with this simple word fanboys these are
the first letters of all the
coordinating conjunctions they are for
and nor but or yet so and that's it if
you can remember that word you can
remember all the coordinating
conjunctions and you can create compound
sentences so quick recap we've got
simple sentences many children play
computer games
others prefer sports now we know how to
make compound sentences many children
play computer games but others prefer
sports so now we're up to the big one
complex sentences what are they how do
we make them remember how I said a
compound sentence needs to complete
thoughts with a coordinating conjunction
in between well a complex sentence needs
a similar word to a coordinating
conjunction but we call these
subordinating conjunctions so a complex
sentence includes a clause or a language
chunk that starts with a subordinating
conjunction or a relative pronoun these
are a bunch of subordinating
conjunctions so you probably already
know them you probably already use them
all the time
words like after although if once since
when while and here are some relative
pronouns who which that where who's now
actually today I'm not really going to
look at relative pronouns we'll do that
in our other live classes or you can
work with your teacher in a one-on-one
tutorial we're just going to look at the
subordinating conjunctions here are the
two simple sentences from before now if
I want to join these two sentences
together
create a complex sentence I need to use
a word from the box above look through
those words which words could join these
two sentences so we're looking here for
conjunctions that show contrast and is
more than one so hopefully you noticed
these words although even though though
whereas and while these are good
conjunctions to show contrast so we can
start the sentence with the
subordinating conjunction like this
although many children play computer
games
others prefer sports and notice that
there is a comma here so when you start
with a subordinating conjunction you
always need a comma after the first
clause or we can put the subordinating
conjunction in the middle many children
play computer games whereas others
prefer sports I haven't put a comma here
but it is sometimes possible to pop a
comma in this place as well you can see
how subordinating conjunctions show a
relationship between the two parts of
the sentence and the subordinating
conjunctions should do this in a variety
of ways they might be showing a time
connection or a contrast connection or
conditional connection so that's the
first thing that I want you to look at
now here's the list from the other page
and I want you to take 30 seconds and
put each subordinating conjunction in
the right column are they showing a
relationship of time of contrast of
reason or condition I'll do the first
one it's after after is showing a time
relationship for example after I got
home I cooked dinner
30 seconds put them in the right spot
you
and here they go time conjunctions after
when as since until while once contrast
although even though though whereas
while rather than reason so that as
because in order to and conditional even
if provided that if unless whether and
you'll notice a couple of the words fit
into more than one column well now that
we've sorted that out
try these I'm gonna give you some
questions now and this is where I want
you to do some work I want you to choose
the right word that makes sense to
create complex sentences ready choose
the most suitable conjunction in these
two sentences
you
and here are the answers in order to
improve public health governments and
individuals must work together number
two gaming can have serious consequences
for a child's social skills even if
their parents monitor their use let's do
three more now choose the most suitable
conjunction
you
and the answers most children will
participate in sports provided that they
are encouraged and supported because
video games are so addictive parents
need to be hyper vigilant schools could
ban devices during class time so that
screen time could be curbed so far so
good now let's try a couple more
difficult ones this time use the
conjunction to join the two sentences
together
now remember here that you can choose
whether to put the conjunction at the
start of the sentence or in the middle
so I'm going to show you some possible
answers but there may be other ways to
write the sentence as gaming technology
has advanced rapidly in the last decade
it is almost irresistible to young minds
and competitive sports should be
encouraged among children in order to
improve health fitness and foster
cooperation so let's do two more like
this
you
let's check some children spent up to
seven hours a day unsupervised although
parents often deny this provided that
they are age-appropriate computer games
can have a positive impact and here are
all four answers keep in mind that these
are not the only answers you maybe wrote
something different and it could be
correct if you want to check put it in
the chat box in the comment box and a
community will check for you now here is
a common error alert this is something
that we often see in IELTS writing can
you see the problem in this text many
schools have banned devices during class
time although this is not always a
public popular policy can you see the
problem here this word this is the
problem
even though although and however have a
similar meaning they use for contrast
grammatically we don't use them in the
same way so you can't start a sentence
although comma and then put half a
sentence after it it doesn't make sense
what we need to do is join these two
sentences together with this conjunction
like this many schools have banned
devices during class time although this
is not always a popular policy or you
can move it to the start as we saw
before although it is not always a
popular policy comma many schools and so
on so now I'm going to show you a couple
of sentences I want you to find and fix
the mistake for me here we go
you
so hopefully you identified the problems
here and fix them up like this cases of
screen addiction are increasing because
mobile devices are now so engaging some
parents forbid the use of devices after
dark while others are more lenient or of
course you could put the conjunctions at
the start of the sentences like this so
let's review these are two simple
sentences we can make a compound
sentence by putting a word from fanboys
in between them and this is a complex
sentence so now it's over to you I'm
gonna give you a question and I want you
to type your answer or your thoughts
into the comments section make sure that
you use some subordinating conjunctions
if you're feeling confident try some
relative pronouns as well remember that
to score band 7 in IELTS writing and to
avoid scoring band 4 you have to use
some complex sentences so even if you
don't know or you don't always use all
the subordinating conjunctions you need
to be confident with at least three or
four of them and make sure that you use
them in your writing so here is your
question and type your answer do
computer games have a positive or
negative impact on children you don't
need to write a whole essay just a few
sentences showing me how you can use
subordinating conjunctions to create
complex sentences now of course for more
help jump onto e to language comm we are
a hundred percent online test
preparation you can submit your writing
and your speaking get some feedback from
our X examiner's and our expert team of
teachers you might like to book a
one-on-one tutorial you can go through
your writing in depth and in detail and
of course you can join our live group
classes they are running twice a day and
they are a fantastic way to work on your
grammar and your vocab and your test
skills as well be sure to subscribe
like comment and share and I'll see you
next time on our you to task of the week
bye
[Music]